No AudioContext found in this environment. Please ensure your window or global object contains a working AudioContext constructor function.
  https://www.tagalog.com/js/Pizzicato.min.js:1
Skip to main
Tagalog English Dictionary
x
Tip: Intermediate and Advanced students:
It's highly recommended you turn on the "Advanced Search" feature if you are an intermediate or advanced Tagalog student to get the most out of the Tagalog.com dictionary.
Tagalog.com is now on the App Store! TDC Tagalog Dictionary
Filipino / Tagalog Diksyunaryo Tools:
Customize DictionaryTDC CorpusFrequency Search ToolExample SentencesRootsAdvanced Search
 Fluent Tagalog Speakers: Click here to learn about contributing to the TDC Dictionary »
WORD OF THE DAY :: Monday - Oct 4th, 2021
22 hrs ago
maiwan
maiwan
[verb] to be left out (AF); to be left behind (AF); to be able to leave something behind (OF)
Example Sentence:
Si Lester ba ang nagpápatuloy sa mga naiwang trabaho ni Denver?
Is Lester continuing the work left behind by Denver?
View all 14 example sentences »
See Past Word of The Day Entries »
A Better Tagalog English Dictionary Online
Thousands Of Built-In Tagalog Example Sentences: This dictionary includes over 20,000+ Tagalog example sentences embedded directly into the dictionary to show proper grammar and usage. Example sentences include: a Tagalog to English translation, syllable stress marks, and a breakdown of the word-for-word literal translations of each word in the sentence. Most sentences also include a full audio recording by a native Tagalog speaker.
Tagalog Audio & Pronunciation Stress Marks: No other Tagalog to English dictionary on the web offers such a comprehensive listing of Tagalog words that includes both syllable stress marks and audio recordings made by native Tagalog speakers. This kind of pronunciation guidance is absolutely critical to learning the language efficiently. The dictionary's audio library currently includes over 40,000+ native-speaker recordings.
Comprehensive Tagalog Verb Info: No other online Tagalog dictionary specifies such detailed Tagalog verb information, including the verb focus, conjugation type, and root. This, along with the thousands of verb example sentences, makes learning Filipino verbs a whole lot easier.
Better Search Algorithm, Custom Built For Tagalog: This Dictionary has been specially coded with enhanced search functionality tailored to the unique attributes of the Filipino / Tagalog language and its complex system of prefixes, suffixes and infixes. This makes the dictionary easier to use, and allows you to find better and more relevant search results than other Tagalog dictionary online. more »
Built-In Lightning Fast Flash Card Builder: No other online Tagalog dictionary is connected to a flash card system like this website has, which makes creating custom flash cards incredibly quick and easy (with audio!). Just click the "paper clip" icon next to any word in the dictionary to add it to a custom flash card set of your own creation. Once you've created your flash card sets, study them through the flash card system on this website or export to Anki. This helps you avoid a ton of tedious and redundant data entry.
More popular dictionary entries:
umabuso nakatapat makontrol lubusan karangalan maong materyales tambalan ulap sining nakakapanghinayang mamilit nakakalat batuhan batuhan daloy obligado alma makaahon tumbong agad-agad trese mag-bike naka-motor nakafocus mainip resolusyon obispo magpatunay matagal-tagal babuyin magsubscribe
Become a patron
We love our supporters! :)
© copyright 2021. Do not copy or reproduce content or audio without prior written authorization. Scraping and republishing our data is a copyright violation. We put a lot of hard work and TLC into this website -- please don't copy or publish our content without permission.
