madaanan (daan) ma_an [verb] to happen to pass through somewhere
diumano'y	allegedly (dí umanó)
kamposanto	cemetery
sinauna	ancient; prehistoric; early people
kalágitnaan	the middle/core/midst (gitna)
pananakop	occupation/conquest (of a place)
di gaya sa ibang beach	unlike other beaches(?)
katag-arawan	
noo'y	noon ay (?)
sa halip	but rather
arkilado	rented (vehicle)
kataka-taká	amazing, puzzling
nangitím	became dark
kalangitan	the sky
simoy	wind
anang	"wika ng" (?)
bangkero	boatman
ani	"wika ni"
nasa mukha nito ang pagtatakang	may kakambal na pangamba ?
kakambál	fellow twin, being like someone
pangambá	fear, anxiety, thread, apprehension (a root?)
ugong	a roaring sound
alimpuyó	whirl, eddy
kumikilos	moving, acting/behaving in a certain way
kinaróroonan	whereabouts/location
hindi na bago	no longer new to / no stranger to (?)
tanawin	view/scene
buháwi	a violent whirlwind, waterspout
matandaán	to be able to remember
pagkasabi ng bangkero sa mga salitang yun
nilamon	devoured (?) lamon: voracious eating
pwersa	force (also puwersa)
sisisid	will dive
paglitáw	emergence, appearance
bagamát	though/although
kinatátakutan	to be afraid of something / causing fear
mapunongkahoy	full of trees
bukana	front
walang pinag iba	nothing was different (?)
mahíhingán	hingán: to ask for something (hingî)
pinag arkilahan rented from(?)
isa pa yun	another thing is..(?)
kakayuhan	the woods (kahoy)
pámayanán	community
tumambád	to expose/disclose; to be revealed
lumihís	to deviate/stray/swerve
paikot-ikot
sumuót	to enter into, to squeeze through something
napúpuntá	ending/winding up somewhere
kinakabahang naigala ni Jason ang tingin	concerned moved around look?
naigala	was able to move something around(?)
napahawak	held something unintentionally
pinisil-pisíl	pisilín: to squeeze something (by hand)
binatà	a young man/bachelor
pabayaan	to abandon/neglect something
Ni isang tao'y wala silang natagpuan.
bakás	trace/print/mark/imprint/outline/clue
sindihán	to light something (on fire)
sagísag	symbol
sagísag	ng buhay	sign of life
ipinadpad	was driven in by current or wind
di inaasahan	unexpected
magdaán to pass, to pass by, to drop by, to undergo, go through
lumubóg	to sink, to set (referring to the sun)
anag-ág	faint light, glimmer of light
namaybáy	enumerated (baybáy) (?)
nitso	tomb
puntód	mound, tomb
higit na marami
guhò	landslide; collapse; ruins
nagapok	rotted (gapok: rotten inside (wood); fragile (wood, clothes, etc. due to age))
mapatilî	to suddenly shriek or scream (tili: shrieking)
makatapak	tapák: barefoot
bungo	skull
tilî	shriek, screech
paningín	vision, sight, sense of sight
pagtataká	puzzlement, surprise
bakit saka lamang/lang	?
pagsapit	arriving/arrival sápit: arrival
ano't anuman mabuti na rin at..	?
bubong	roof
masisilungan	silungán: refuge/shelter/haven
harapán	front, presence
kimona	a loose fitting blouse
dumungaw	to look out of a window
tanglawán	to illuminate something (tangláw: light/illumination)
ináng	mother
luwát	a long time
