Ito ang kainin mo.	This is what you will eat.
Ikaw ang kumain.	You are the one who will eat.
Pagágalitan si Anna ng tatay niyá kapág ginabí siyá nang uwî.	Anna will be reprimanded by her dad if she gets home late.
Gaano katagal 'yon kapag nilakad?	How long does it take to walk? (How long would it take if you walked?)
Magsísimulâ pa lang si James kumain nang dumatíng ang pinsan niyá.	James was just about to start to eat when his cousin arrived.
Hindî pa kitá tinátanóng tumátanggí ka na.	I haven't asked you anything yet and you're already saying no.
Nakakapagod ang gawain	The task was tiring
walang kikilos	don't move

nagpapátay	to have had someone killed (nagpa)
nagpapatáy	to be killing someone (nagCV)

> "while were/was doing" (eg, with 'habang' or 'nang') is written as "while is doing"

 What did you do while we were watching TV?

			Anó ang ginawâ mo habang nanónoód kamí ng TV?  "What did you do while we were watching TV?"


 Jeff was cleaning the car when we arrived.

			Naglilinis ng kotse si Jeff nang dumatíng kamí. "Cleaning the car Jeff when we arrived (past)."



> Ongoing actions/states use present aspect:

 I believe in you.

			Naniniwala ako sa iyo.  ("I am believing in you.")



> "how long has/have..." uses present aspect:

 How long have you been waiting here?

			Gaano ka na katagal naghihintay dito?  ("How long are you waiting here already?")



> "can" is stated as "will be able to" , "can't" is stated as "won't be able to"

 Where can I watch the film?

		Saán ko mapápanoód ang pelíkulá?

 How can I get to this place?

           Paano akó makakapuntá sa lugár na itó?  ("How will I be able to get to this place?")


 Which boy can't talk?

		Aling batang lalaki ang hindi makakapagsalita?  ("Which boy won't be able to talk?")

 How To Help	

			Paano Makakatulong

 How do you say "thanks" in Tagalog?

			Paano mo sasabihing "thank you" sa Tagalog?

 Ang mga lamók ang nagdádalá ng dengue virus.

			Mosquitoes are the carriers of the dengue virus.



> Note: "have not yet given" is stated as "am not yet giving" or rather "am not yet able to give"

 Hindî ko pa naibíbigáy kay Bill yung ipinadalá mong regalo.

				I have not given to Bill yet the gift you sent through me.


Nakákatawa na si Erich nang bisitahin ko kagabí.

				Erich was already able to laugh when I visited her last night.

> "How do/would.." is written as "How will.."
Paano ko maitatalâ ang mga natutuhan ko?        How do I record what I learn?
Paano ko sasabihin ito sa Tagalog?      How would you say this in Tagalog?

> "I remember" is "I am remembering"
Naaalala ko…	I remember…
Natátandaán kitá pero hindî ko maalala ang pangalan mo.	I remember you, but I can't remember your name.
Natátandaán ko.	I remember.
Natátandaán ko...	I remember...

> "I remembered"
Naalala ko na!	Now I remember! / I remembered it now!
