Example Grouping: "and"
Putî ang aso at ang pusà.	The dog and the cat are white.
Halika at sumali ka sa amin.	Come and join us.
Nag-uusap siná Peter at Paul.	Peter and Paul are talking to each other.
Kailán at saán kayó nagpakasál?	When and where did you get married?
Nabuô ang tubig at nagíng yelo.	The water solidified and became ice.
Sinaktán at sinugatan siyá ni Ador.	Ador struck and wounded her.
Nagwagî siná Bong at Donna sa pustahan.	Bong and Donna won the bet.
Natátarantá at nagkakaguló ang lahát.	Everyone is rattled and confused.
Parehong kakandidato siná Miguel at Alejandro.	Michael and Alejandro will both run for office.
Magdalá tayo ng payong at bakâ umulán.	Let's bring an umbrella as it might rain.
Example Grouping: "and"
Sumunód tayo sa mga awtoridád at batás.	Let's obey the authorities and laws.
Ingatan mo at bakâ masirà.	Handle it carefully as it might break.
Mag-ingat ka at bakâ ka mádulas.	Be careful as you might slip.
Batà ka pa at marami ka pang maeexpérience.	You're still young and you'll have more to experience.
Bakit dinakíp siná Aldrin at Larry?	Why were Aldrin and Larry apprehended?
Tapós na ang laban niná Bert at Bong.	The Bert and Bong's match is over.
At nang tingnáng mabuti ni John ang palasyo, itó ay sadyáng napakalakí at nápakagandá.	And when John looked at the palace, it was especially large and very beautiful.
Nagpahayág silá ng utang na loób at pasasalamat.	They expressed gratitude and appreciation.
Manánatili kailanmán ang kabutihan niná Rica at Alexa.	Rica and Alexa's goodness is enduring.
Mahaharáp si Raf sa oposisyón at paghihirap.	Raf will encounter opposition and suffering.
Mabibigô ang pamámaraán niná PJ at RR.	PJ and RR's method will fail.
Masaráp ang bikong inihain niná Queenie at Judith.	The rice cake served by Queenie and Judith was delicious.
Nagkáibá ang ikinilos ni Janis at ni Avi.	Janis and Avi's action differed.
Pitóng batà ang nilagnát nang mataás at namatáy.	Seven children developed a high fever and died.
Bumangon ka at simulán mo nang mag-ehersisyo.	Get up and start exercising.
Sumasailalim si Elio sa matindíng pagsubok at tuksó.	Elio is under extreme trial and temptation.
Naaayos na ang isyu niná Gloria at Alex.	Gloria and Alex's issue are already being resolved.
Nagpatuloy ang ulán at nilagnát si Mario.	The rain continued to fall and Mario developed a fever.
Anóng títuló ang nakopo niná Leni at Bong?	What title did Leni and Bong won?
Sumailalim siná Lita at Olivia sa matindíng panggigipít.	Lita and Olivia were under intense pressure.
Magkakáhiwaláy nang limáng taón siná Dan at Pat .	Dan and Pat will be separated for five years.
Kaya mo bang magpahayág ng mahihirap na kaisipán at ideya?	Can you convey complex thoughts and ideas?
Sumikláb ang hidwaan niná Nina at Cherry.	Nina and Cherry's feud ignited.
Anóng landás ang nakaharáp kiná Patch at Marco?	What course is set before Patch and Marco?
Itinatakdâ ba ng kompanyá kung saán at kailán dapat kumain?	Does the company limit our lunch to certain places and times?
Paano mo ituturing ang gawâ niná Jojo at Luis?	How would you rate the work of Jojo and Luis?
Kasama naming mangingisdâ siná Gerardo at Boni.	We'll go fishing with Gerardo and Boni.
Siná Ana, Karen at Nina ang bubuô sa banda.	Ana, Karen and Nina will form the band.
Anó ba ang tinutukoy niná Berta at Wilma?	What were Berta and Wilma referring to?
Lumalalâ ang hidwaan niná Racquel at Nida.	Racquel and Nida's rift worsens.
Ang Luzón, Visayas at Mindanao ang mga pangunahing islang bumubuô sa Pilipinas.	Luzon, Visayas at Mindanao are the major islands that form the Philippines.
Dádakpín at pápatayín siyá kalaunan.	She will be arrested and killed later.
Anóng koponán ang tinatalo niná Carl at Dan?	Which team are Carl and Dan defeating?
Ihain mo agád ang sinigáng at dinuguán.	Serve the sinigang and dinuguan immediately.
Itó ang kasalang dinaluhán niná Shamy at Eina.	This is the wedding thatShamy and Eina attended.
Kinasuhan na nilá siná Eva at Loren.	They have already filed a case against Eva and Loren.
Hindî pa nagreresígn siná Sylvia at Ciri.	Sylvia and Ciri haven't resigned yet.
Nilagnát akó at sumamâ ang pakiramdám ko sa araw ng pagsusulit.	I had a fever and was not feeling well on the day of the exam.
Kunin ninyó siláng lahát at pagbabarilín!	Take them all out and shoot them!
Dito ka umupô sa tabí ko at sabayán mo akóng kumain.	Sit here beside me and eat with me.
Hilingín kiná Cardo at Alyana na gamitin ang impormasyón mulâ sa libró.	Ask Cardo and Alyana to use information from the book.
Uusad na ang kaso niná Kara at Mia.	Kara and Mia's case will go forward.
Huwág ka diyán at bakâ tamaan ka ng bola.	Don't stay there as you might get hit by the ball.
Hindî pa tumatayâ siná Don at Aida.	Don and Aida have not placed their bet yet.
Nakákabawì at mulî na namán akóng gumíginhawa.	I'm recovering and getting comfortable again.
Anó ang itátanghál niná Sally at Gemma mamayâ?	What will Sally and Gemma present later?
Ingatan mo ang salamín at bakâ mabasag.	Handle the mirror carefully as it might break.
Hindî na nakabawì ang mga stock niná Pia at Cat.	Pia and Cat's stocks never rebounded.
Nakabawì na ang ilog, at walâ nang tandâ ng polusyón ng langís.	The river has recovered fully, and there's no sign of oil pollution.
Makuntento ka kung may tirahan at pagkain ka.	If you have shelter and food, that should be enough for you.
Tinatrý niná Val at Helen na magkaanák.	Val and Helen are trying to have a child.
Mag-aadjúst ka sa ayaw at sa gustó mo.	You will adjust to what you do and don't like.
Dádakpín ang mga suspek at hindî maaaring piyánsahán.	The suspects will be arrested and held without bail.
Dáhan-dahan at bakâ tayo lumampás.	Drive slowly as we might go past where we're supposed to go.
Hiwaláy na magpápaskó siná Christian at Evelyn.	Christian and Evelyn will spend Christmas separately.
Pagsikapang tamuhín ang karunungan at káunawaán.	Strive to acquire wisdom and understanding.
Magandáng gabí, mga ginoó at mga binibini.	Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
Nilagnát siná Leo at Eugene at inihiwaláy sa ibáng mga bilanggô.	Leo and Eugene developed a fever and were separated from other prisoners.
Sigurado na bang matútulóy ang kasál nilá Jim at Jane?	Is the wedding of Jim and Jane already sure to push through?
Bakit ka sa sahíg umuupô at hindî sa silya?	Why are you sitting on the floor and not on a chair?
Bantayán mo ang pintô at bakâ may makapasok.	Guard the door as someone might be able to get in.
Huwág mong sisipain ang aso at bakâ kagatín ka.	Don't kick the dog as it might bite you.
Hindî magtátagál at mag-aaway ang dalawáng batang iyán.	It won't take long before those two kids will quarrel.
Sundán mo lang ang mapa at hindî ka malíligáw.	Just follow the map and you won't get lost.
Tumirá akó sa California at sa New York, pero sa California akó nagtagál.	I lived in California and New York, but it was in California that I stayed long.
Mauná na kayó at hahabol na lang akó.	You go ahead and I will just catch up with you.
Si John at hindî si Jack ang dumadalaw kay Jill.	It's John and not Jack who visits with Jill.
Huwág mong galawín ang sugat mo at bakâ dumugô.	Don't touch your wound as it might bleed.
Itigil mo ang ginagawâ mo at makiníg ka sa akin.	Stop what you're doing and listen to me.
Kailán ka púpuntá sa America at mga kailán ka makákabalík?	When are you going to America and about when will you be back?
Nagtiwalà si Mary kay Paul at hindî niyá naisip na lolokohin siyá nitó.	Mary trusted Paul and she never thought that he would cheat / cheat on her.
Lumingón ka at tignan mo kung sino ang sumúsunód sa atin.	Look behind you and see who's following us.
Sundín mo lang ang listahan na ibinigáy ko sa iyó at hindî ka malílitó.	Just follow the list that I gave you and you won't get confused.
Example Grouping: "as"
Mag-ingat ka at baka ka mahulog.	Be careful as you might fall.
Pasénsiyá na at hindî ko sinasadyâ.	I'm sorry as that was not my intention.
Bumangon ka na at tanghalì na.	Get up now as it's already late (in the morning).
Mabuti at hindî ka sinísitá ng amo mo.	Good thing your boss doesn't interrogate you.
Huwág ka diyán maupô at marumí iyán.	Don't sit there as that is dirty.
Maghandâ ka na at malapit na tayong umalís.	Get ready now as we are about to leave.
Huwág ka munang umalís at hindî pa kitá pinápayagan.	Don't go out yet as I have not yet given you my permission.
Bilisán natin at bábagsák na ang ulán.	Let's hurry up as the rain is just about to fall.
Huwág mong masyadong seryosohin at larô lang 'yan.	Don't take it too seriously as it's just a game.
Isará mo ang mga bintanà at lumálakás ang hangin.	Close the windows as the wind is getting stronger.
Huwág mong ibigin si Mary at siguradong masasawî ka lang.	Don't fall in love with Mary as you will just be brokenhearted for sure.
Huwág kayóng maingay at nagpápahingá ang inyóng amá.	Don't be noisy because your father is resting / sleeping.
Huwág kang makialám sa kanilá at baka ikáw pa ang masisi.	Don't get involved with them as you might be the one to get blamed eventually.
At ano ngayon?	And so?
Tahimik at makinig!	Shut up and listen!
Tumayo at maglakad.	Stand up and walk.
Siya'y tamad at sakim.	He's greedy and lazy.
Matangkad siya at guwapo.	He is tall and handsome.
Ngumiti siya at nagpaalam.	She smiled and said goodbye.
Umupo si Tom at naghintay.	Tom sat down and waited.
Sino ka at saan ka galing?	Who are you and where do you come from?
Aksaya iyon ng oras at pera.	It's a waste of time and money.
At kung sinabi kong "hindi"?	What if I say "no"?
Aksaya iyon ng oras at pera.	That's a waste of time and money.
Umalis ka na dito at mabilis.	Get out of here, and quickly.
May karayom at sinulid ka ba?	Do you have needle and thread?
Sumubok siya, at nagawa niya.	He tried, and he did it.
Bumabagsak ang dahon at puno.	The leaf and the tree are falling.
Siya ay bulag, bingi at pipi.	He's blind, deaf and mute.
Ang langit ay maulap at uulan.	The sky is cloudy and it will rain.
Tingnan mo ako, at gayahin mo.	Look on me, and do likewise.
At bakit ko naman gagawin iyon?	And why would I do that?
Berde at kulay-rosas ang kumot.	The blanket is green and pink.
Walang anak sina Tomas at Maria.	Tom and Mary have no children.
Bukas ang kahon at walang laman.	The box was open and empty.
Nagsu-sushi sina Taro at Hanako.	Hanako and Taro went to eat some sushi.
Ihalo ang kanin sa itlog at toyo.	Combine the rice with the egg and soy sauce.
Umuwi ka at tawagan mo ang pulis!	Go back home and call the police!
Anong kaibahan ng nayon at bayan?	What's the difference between a village and a town?
At nabigyan kami ng libreng pizza.	And we got a free pizza.
Pumarini ka at magkita tayo bukas.	Come and see me tomorrow.
