Pinanoód niyá ang palabás.	He watched the show.
Kákabahán ka kapág pinanoód mo ang The Exorcist.	You'd get nervous when you watch The Exorcist.
Panoorín mo si Tom.	Watch Tom.
Inantók akó sa pinanoód natin.	The movie we watched made me sleepy.
Nauumay na si Michelle sa pelíkuláng pinápanoód niyá.	Michelle is getting sick of the movie she's watching.
Panoorín natin ang concert ni Josh Groban.	Let's watch Josh Groban's concert.
Anóng sine ang pinanoód ninyó?	What movie did you watch?
Pinápanoód mo ba ang Game of Thrones?	Do you watch Game of Thrones?
Anó ang panónoorín nating pelíkulá bukas?	What movie are we going to watch tomorrow?
Anó ang pinápanoód mo?	What are you watching?
Anó bang pinanoód ninyó doón?	What did you watch there?
Hindî akó nag-enjóy sa pinanoód na pelíkulá.	I didn't enjoy the movie that I watched.
Hindî ko alám ang sunód na papanoorin nilá.	I don't know what they will watch next.
Panoorín mo itó.	Watch this.
Anó ang pínakahulíng pelíkuláng pinanoód mo?	What is the last film you watched?
Ayaw ng nanay ni Claire na panoorín siyá ng TV habang gumagawâ siyá ng homework.	Claire's mom does not want her to watch TV while doing her homework.
Sige, panónoorín muna kitá kung paano mo ginagawâ iyán.	OK, I'll watch how you do it first.
Sino ang pinápanoód mo diyán sa bintanà?	Whom are you obverving there through the window?
Magtátapón ka lang ng pera at oras kapág pinanoód mo ang pelíkuláng iyán.	You will just be wasting money and time if you'd watch that movie.
Panoorin ako.	Watch me.
Panoorin mo 'to.	Watch this.
Panoorin mo ako.	Watch me.
Panoorin niyo ako.	Watch me.
Pinanuod nila ako sa katahimikan.	They watched me in silence.
Naramdaman ni Maria na may mga taga-ibang-mundong pinapanuod siya.	Mary senses the aliens are watching her.
Pinanuod niya ang harding lumaki, at pinanuod niyang pumula at huminog ang mga mansanas.	She watched the gardens grow, and she watched the apples turn red and ripen.
Pinanuod niya ang harding lumaki, at pinanuod niyang pumula at huminog ang mga mansanas.	She watched the gardens grow, and she watched the apples turn red and ripen.
