possibility/necessity:  puwede, maaári, dapat
desire: ayaw, gusto, ibig, náis
kailangan can fit in the first group as 'must (be)' or the second group as 'must (have)/need'

maaari and puwede, which both denote ability, permission, or possibility, are synonymous in all their occurrences.  Puwede is only
used informally.

for dápat, there are two alternates: marápat and nararápat.  nararápat freely alternates with dápat but is more formal.  marápat is
is an alternative in nominalized forms: "Ito and dápat/marápat gawin."

náis is quite formal and also denotes a stronger preference.

all 8 of these may be doubled+linked for extra emphasis, eg:
kailangang-kailangan 'really need(s) (to), need(s) (to)...very much' 
ayaw na ayaw, dapat na dapat, gustong-gusto, ibig na ibig, maaaring-maaari, nais na nais, and puwedeng-puwede.
(The intensive formations corresponding to dapat, maaari, nais, and puwede are relatively rare.)

kailangan, maaari, and puwede are also used as unaffixed adjectives.  In this use kailangan means 'necessary', while maaari and puwede
mean 'possible'. eg:

Puwede/maaari/kailangan ba iyon?	Is that possible/necessary?
Kung puwede/maaari/kailangan aalis ako bukas.	If possible/necessary, I'll leave tomorrow.

puwede, maaari and dapat only occur in form: pseudo-verb + -ng linker / inversion + clause
kailangan also occurs in this form.
literal meanings are "it is possible/fitting/necessary for.."
Usually, however, kailangan and dapat are more freely translatable by an auxiliary verb such as 'ought to', 'must', or should', and 
maaari and puwede by an auxiliary verb such as 'can', 'may', 'could', or 'might'

A clause following kailangan or dapat may be preceded by a linker, by the inversion marker ay, by a 
pause, or by a pause plus ay, a clause following maaari or puwede is always preceded by a linker. (Once 
more, some speakers use only the linker na/-ng, others either this or the linker ng.) Thus there are sentences 
like: 
Kailangan/Dapat ay lider si Juan. 
but there is no: *Maaari/Puwede ay lider si Juan.

The clause in this construction may be any normal statement type, with its own predicate and topic. 
If the predicate is a verbal, the basic form of the verb, as well as any of the three aspect-marked forms, may 
be used.

-----------------------------
wala, marami, masyado:
possessive:
marami kang sapatos	you have a lot of shoes
masyado ka nang maraming sapatos	you have way too many shoes
masyado ka nang kaunting sapatos	you have a few too many shoes
Masyado kang bilib sa sarili mo.        You're so full of yourself. / You have too much belief in yourself.
Wala akong kahit kaunting duda.	I have no doubt at all.
Wala akong kasáma.      I have no companion.
Wala akong pakialam sa gastos.  I don't care about the expense.

Masyado ang kape ko ngayon.     I drank too much coffee today.

wala nang espasyo	there's no space
Ikaw lang ang mahal ko at wala nang iba.        You’re the only one I love and no one else.
Mistulang pina­ka­walang mga lobo ang mga kriminal at walang habas na pumapatay.  Wala nang kinatatakutan nag­papa­ulan ng bala sa biktima.
Walâ nang magnanakaw niyáng sirâ mong bisikleta.        No one would bother to steal your broken bicycle.
Nakabawì na ang ilog, at walâ nang tandâ ng polusyón ng langís. The river has recovered fully, and there's no sign of oil pollution.
Sigurado akóng walâ nang masasabi si George tungkól sa trabaho natin.   I'm sure that George would already be very pleased with our work.
Wala nang mas malala pa dito.   Nothing can be worse than this.
Wala nang nagtitiwala sa kanya. No one trusts him any more.
Walâ nang tawad?        No more discount? / Can't you give it to me at a lower price?
lipas, wala nang lasa   for food, wine, etc., that has lost its good taste
parang walâ nang bukas  (bukas) phr_ [idiomatic] as if there's no tomorrow
