grammar section 5

5.4 The direct object with active verbs is (1) a dative of the pronoun or (2) the dative particle
before a name or title (kay or kina) or (3) ng plus a noun or phrase.  Note the direct object
marker ng is written separate from what precedes it.  The direct object of an active verb must 
follow the verb.

51. Kayo bang dalawa ang naghAhanap ng kwArto?  "Are both of you looking for a room?"
53. Lagi silang naghAhandA ng isda.  "They always serve fish."

If the direct object of the active verb is a proper noun or a pronoun, the dative form is used.

54. Ako na lang ang mattAtanong kay Mr. OcAmpo.  "I'll be the one to ask Mr. Ocampo."
55. Sino kayA ang gustong maghintay sa iyo? "Who would want to wait for you?"

However, the genitive of the demonstrative pronoun is used as the direct object of active verbs.
For example, in the following sentence "noong libro" ("those books") is the direct object of the
active verb "bumili":

56. Ako ang bumili noong mga libro (or "ng mga librong iyon").  "I was the one who bought those
books."

With a verb that refers to motion, the direct object is introduced by sa or ng alternatively.
(Sa introduces phrases that refer to location and the direct object of a verb which refers to
motion can be thought of as the direct object or as the location.)

57.  Sa Sabado pa siya bAbalik ng (or "sa") Maynila.  "He will only be going back to Manila on
Saturday."


"Pa" is added to adjectives to give a meaning "even more (so and so)".  The dependent form of the 
verb is used after "mabuti pa".

59. Mas mabuti pa magpunta na lang tayo sa palengke.  "It would be even better to just go to the
market."

The form "mas" can be dropped.

60. Mabuti nga bumili ka na lang ng isa a.  "You'd do better just to buy one."

Masyado + ng + (adjective) means "too (adjective)."

61. Hindi naman masyadong malaki.  "It isn't too big."

The form "masyado" can be dropped.

Marami yata para sa akin ito e.  "It seems to be too much for me apparently."

4.51 Mukha, para

Mukha "apparently" and para "like"* precede the forms they modify and are linked with "ng".
* not to be confused with its homonym para "for".

63. Mukhang uulan na nga.  "It does look like rain."
64. Parang gusto kong uminom ng softdrink.  "I feel like a soft drink."
65. Parang uulan na nga!  "It does seem like it's going to rain!"

5.62 Palagi (lagi), talaga

"Palagi" (short form "lagi") "always" and talaga "really" may alternatively precede the forms
they modify, in which case they are linked with "ng", or they may come immediately after the
particles in which case they are not linked.

66. Talagang wala na ho ba kayong bakanteng kwarto?  "Do you really have no vacant rooms?"

In the following sentences "talaga" comes after the particles:

67. Gusto mo ba talaga rito?  "Do you really like it here?"
68. Lagi silang naghahanda ng isda.  "They always serve fish."
69. Iyon lagi ang tinatanong mo!  "That is what you always ask!"

5.63 Kasi

Kasi "because" comes first in the clause or immediately after the particles

70. Kasi hindi pa nagsisimula ang klase.  "Because the classes haven't started!"
71. Hanggang ngayon kasi wala pa rin.  "Because up to now, there still isn't any."

5.64 Bago

Bago basically means "new."

72. Lumipat na kami sa bago naming bahay. (or Lumipat na kami sa bagong bahay namin.)
"We have moved to our new house."

As an adverb, bago means "first, newly"

73. Nung bago ka dumating dito.  "When you first came here."

As a conjunction "bago" means "before."  In this usage it is followed by the dependent form
of the verb.

74. Bumili muna tayo ng lamsyed bago tayo uminom.  "Let's buy a lampshade before we get a drink."

grammar section 7 (p. 281)

7.1 potential forms (abilitive)
maka(pag)- active
ma- direct
ma-an local

almost all verbs may have potential forms

for some mag- verbs, pag- is inserted after the potential active (maka) and local passive (ma-an)
forms, but not after direct passive (ma-) forms.

for mang- verbs, pang- may be put after the prefixes.

7.11 some verbs have a potential form with a long vowel on the prefix. ex:
makArinig nakArinig nakAkarinig makAkarinig
mArinig nArinig nAririnig mAririnig
mAtirhan nAtirhan nAtitirhan mAtitirhan

the reduplicated vowel in the root tends to be shortened.  dialects differ though.
some retain the long vowel in the root:
nArIrinig, nAtItirahan
or shorten the vowel in the prefix:
narIrinig, natItirhan (Manila)

7.2 meanings

7.21 past potential: managed to do, happened to do, succeeded in doing, had a chance to do, did
accidentally

7.22 present potential:
1) abilitive   - nakAkabAsa ka ba?  can you read
2) repeated/general opportunity or repeated accidental/incidental
3) something that has not yet had a chance to happen, with "hindi pa", eg "hindi pa nakAkahAnap": not yet been able to find
note that, the negative (eg, hindi nakAka-) means *physically* unable, not just temporary inability

7.23 future potential:
a) will be able to happen
b) will succeed in happening
c) will happen to someone
also used in clauses introduced by "kung", as it requires future tense

7.24 dependent tense (infinitive)
1) cannot or will not be able to (temporarily, as opposed to the present potential)
2) other contexts which require the dependent, eg after para, baka, gusto, etc. (see p. 115)

7.4 local potential meaning "happen to someone"
for some roots, the local passive potential means "happen to someone"


