abala	related to busy; occupied; delayed
abang	watcher
abO	ash, ashes
abot	related to reaching (something), attaining (something)
abuloy	alms, contribution, subsidy, aid, help from multiple people
abuso	related to abuse, mistreatment
ága	earliness
agad	immediately, at once, quickly
agaw	related to snatching; grabbing
agos	flow (lit/fig)
agwa	related to water
ahit	related to shaving
ahon	related to bringing up, rising up or lifting up
akit	related to attracting or appealing to or seducing
ako	related to I or me
aksaya	related to wasting
akusa	
akyat	related to climbing or ascending
ala	related to prefix used before the hour when stating time (Ex:
alaga	related to caring for, taking care of (something/someone)
alala	related to 1.) worrying, 2.) remembering
alalay	
alam	related to knowing, knowledge, understanding
alat	related to salt or saltiness
alay	related to offering or dedicating
alis	related to leaving, departing
aliw	related to pleasure or entertainment
alog	related to shaking, jerking
alsa	
ambag	related to contributing
amin	related to 1.) ours, 2.) confessing or owning up (to something)
amoy	related to smell or odor
anak	related to children
angat	
angkat	
angkop	
ani	crop, harvest
ani	said by
anim	related to six, sixth
ano	related to what
anod	
anyo	related to year; appearance, form
apak	
apat	related to four, fourth
api	related to persecution or oppression
apo	related to grandchildren or descendants
apoy	fire, flame
aprub	
apuhap	
apura	related to being a hurry or a rush
aral	related to learning, studying
araw	related to 1.) day, 2.) sun
aresto	related to arresting or prosecuting
ari	related to property or ownership
arte	related to artistic; artificial / insincere
asa	related to hope or anticipating; reliance or dependence
asár	infuriating, offensive, teasing
asawa	related to marriage
asikaso	
asim	related to sourness
asiwa	
aso	related to dogs / canines; or smoke
atas	
atras	related to back, behind; backward
awa	related to pity, mercy, compassion
away	related to fighting; quarreling
awit	related to song, singing
aya	related to 1.) inviting someone to something, or 2.) being agreeable
ayaw	don't/doesn't want
ayon	related to being agreeable to (something); being in conformity;
ayos	related to 1.) being in order, orderly or settled 2.) being ok, good
baba	related to being low, below or down
babad	related to soaking
babae	related to women, females
babaw	related to being shallow
baboy	related to pig
bagabag	related to being worried, distressed, agitated
bagal	related to being slow (in speed)
bagay	related to suiting, adapting, conforming; or being a thing
bago	related to new, changing, before
bagot	
bagsak	related to crashing, falling, failing
bagyó	storm, typhoon; successful
bahâ	flood
bahagi	related to a portion or part or dividing
bahala	related to being concerned, apprehensive, overseeing
bahay	related to house, home
baho	related to smelliness or bad smells
bait	related to good; kind
baka	beef; cow
bakâ	perhaps, maybe, might
bakas	related to trace or outline
bakasyon	related to vacationing
bakuna	vaccine
balat	related to skin; leather; covering
bali	related to breaking; fracturing
baligtad	related to inside out, all turned around, upside-down
balik	related to returning (from somewhere)
baling	
balisa	
balita	related to news
baliw	
balot	related to wrapping, enveloping, encasing, packing up
banat	related to stretch; attack, hit, insult
bangas	related to bruises or bruising
bangga	related to colliding or crashing
banggit	mention
bangon	to arise, get up, rise up
banta	threat
bantay	related to guarding, watching over
baon	related to snacks or food; burying or being burried
baril	related to guns, firearms
basa	related to 1.) being wet, 2.) reading (text)
basag	related to broken glass
basura	trash, garbage
bata	related to child, young, youth
batas	related to law, regulations
batay	related to basis or basing on or according to or contingent on
bati	related to greeting (someone)
bato	related to 1.) stone, 2.) throwing (something)
bawal	related to prohibited, banned
bawas	related to reducing; lessening
bawi	related to recovering; reclaiming
bayad	related to payment, paying
bayan	related to society, country, town
baybáy	edge, border, coast; spelling
bayo	related to pounding or crushing
benta	related to selling (something)
bida	
bigat	related to heaviness, weight
bigay	related to giving
bigkas	related to pronouncing or reciting
bigkis	related to being bound or tied up
bigla	related to suddenly, surprisingly
bigo	related to failing or disappointing or being unsuccessful
bigti	strangled, hanged or hung by a rope
bihag	
bihis	related to getting dressed
bilang	related to counting
bili	related to buying
bilin	related to instructions; orders
bilis	related to speed, speeding up, moving quickly
bilog	related to round; circular
bingi	
biro	related to joking, banter
bisà	power, force, effect, strength
bisita	
bitin	related to hanging, swinging or being suspended
bitiw	related to letting go; resigning; releasing one's hold of something
biyahe	trip, journey
bobo	
bomba	
boto	related to voting or a vote
buga	
bugbóg	beating up, pummeling
buhat	related to lifting, carrying
buhay	related to life, being alive
buhos	related to pouring
buka	related to open
bukas	related to 1.) tomorrow, 2.) open, opening
búkid	farm, country side
buko	related to 1.) flowering, 2.) being caught or revealed or exposed or
bulág	blind
bulók	rotten, corrupt
bulong	related to whispering
bundok	related to mountains
bunga	
bungad	front, threshold
bunot	related to pulling up; pulling out
buntis	related to pregnancy or being pregnant
buntot	
bunyág	disclosure, revelation
buo	related to completeness; fullness; whole, entire
bura	related to erasing
burda	related to embroidery
butas	related to a hole, or a hole in something
buti	related to being good or fine, becoming good
buwag	
buwan	related to moon; month
daan	related to paths, roads, passing by or through
dagan	related to adding weight to something or pinning something down
dagat	related to ocean, sea
dagdag	related to adding to or supplementing
dahil	related to because or the cause of something
daing	related to complaining or drying (fish, meat, etc.)
dakip	
dala	related to carried, brought
dalaga	
dalas	related to frequency or being frequent
dalaw	related to visiting, visit, visitor
dalawa	related to two
daldal	related to chattering or babble or talkativeness
dali	related to hurrying, hastening, doing something quickly
daló	presence, attendance
daloy	
dama	related to feeling (something)
damay	related to sympathizing
damdám	take offense, feel resentment
dami	related to many, multiple
damit	related to clothing
damo	related to grass
dampi	related to gently touching or dabbing
danas	related to experiencing (something)
dangal	
daong	related to ships or docks
daos	related to holding (an event); celebrating
dapa	related to lying face down
dapat	related to being appropriate, deserving, should, ought to be
dasal	related to praying; prayer
dating	related to arriving, arrival
daya	related to cheating, scamming, betraying, deceiving
dayo	visitor, stranger, foreigner
desisyon	
digma	related to war
diin	related to emphasizing or stressing
dikit	related to sealed, sticking, glued
dikta	related to dictating
dilat	related to having opened eyes
dilig	related to watering something
dilim	related to dark; gloomy; dim
dinig	related to hearing, listening
diri	related to disgust
diskubre	
dismaya	
dito	related to here (location)
diwang	ceremony, celebration (prefer pagdiriwang)
diyos	related to God
doble	
doon	related to there, over there
duda	related to doubting, skeptical
dugo	related to blood
dugtong	
dukot	related to pulling or drawing something out of something else;
dula	related to drama
dulas	
dumi	related to dirtiness
dungaw	related to looking out of a window or looking out generally
dura	related to saliva or mucus
durog	related to being crushed or broken into pieces
dusa	
edad	age
gaan	related to being light / not heavy; or being easy
gabi	related to night
gago	
galà	rove, wander
galák	joy, delight
galang	related to respect; reverence
galaw	related to movement, activity
galing	related to 1.) being skilled or excellent (at something), 2.) coming
galit	related to being mad/angry
gamit	related to 1.) item, 2.) using (something)
gamot	related to medicine, practicing medicine, treating a patient
gana	related to 1.) being enthusiastic or interested in something, 2.)
ganap	related to happening; fully, completely
ganda	related to beauty, being beautiful
ganoon	
ganti	
gapos	related to bindings or chains or being bound or chained
gastos	related to expenses; costs
gata	related to 1.) juice, or 2.) coconut milk or cream
gawa	related to doing, making
gawad	related to 1.) awards or grants, or 2.) departments or committees
gaya	related to imitating; simulating; copying
gayat	related to being sliced, or a slice (of something)
gayón	such, like that (gaya + niyon)
giba	related to demolishing or destroying or tearing down
giit	insistence; assertion; persistent asking
gilid	edge, border, margin; a slope of a hill
gipit	related to being in dire straits, or having trouble or difficulties
gisa	related to saute
gising	related to waking up, awakening
gitna	related to being in the center or middle
gugol	related to spending money or time or costing something
guhit	related to portraying; drawing
gulat	related to being shocked or surprised
gulo	related to being disordered; being confused; being troubled
gunita	related to remembering; recollecting; reminiscence
gupit	related to cutting, cutting hair
gusto	
gutom	related to being hungry or hunger
guwapo	
haba	related to long, elongated, length
habol	related to chasing after something; catching up with something
hagis	related to throwing (an object)
hain	food on a table; offering in sacrifice; tribute
halaga	related to valuation, worth, important
halal	related to elections; electing
halata	
halik	
halo	related to mixing; mixture
hamak	related to being in a poor state or condition
hambing	related to comparing
hamon	related to ham (pork); daring, defying, challenging
hampas	related to swat; hit; strike
hanap	related to searching, finding
handa	related to being ready, preparing, preparing something (food)
hanga	related to admiring, appreciating
hapon	related to afternoon; supper
harang	related to blocking or intercepting
harap	related to in front of, facing (something/someone)
hari	related to reigning or being a king
hasa	related to sharpening
hati	related to division, dividing (something)
hatid	related to bringing something somewhere; escorting someone; dropping
hatol	
hawa	related to catching a disease or illness
hawak	related to holding, grasping (something)
hayag	related to announcing or declaring something
higa	related to lying down, resting
higit	related to exceeding, more than, surpassing
higpit	related to tightness; strictness / being restricted
hikayat	
hila	pull
hilera	
hiling	related to requesting, asking for a favor, asking earnestly,
hilo	related to dizziness
hilot	
hina	related to weak; soft
hindi	related to no, not
hinga	related to breathing
hingal	
hingi	related to requesting (something), asking for something, soliciting
hintay	related to waiting
hinto	related to stop; halt
hipo	related to touching or fondling
hiram	related to borrowing
hirang	related to being chosen or appointed or favored
hirap	related to 1.) difficulty, 2.) poverty/suffering
hiwa	related to slicing or cutting into
hiwalay	related to being separated or separating
hiya	related to shame, embarrassment
hiyaw	related to screaming; yelling; shouting
hubad	related to being naked or undressing
hudyat	
hugas	related to washing
hukay	related to digging up or excavating
hula	related to predicting, guessing
huli	related to 1.) end, last, 2.) capturing, seizing
hulma	related to molding or shaping
hulog	related to 1.) falling, 2.) failing, 3.) meaning/definition
husay	related to skill; skillfulness
iba	related to other, different
ibig	related to love, loving
igting	
ihaw	related to grilling or barbecuing
ihi	related to peeing; urinating
ikli	related to being short or brief
ikot	related to revolving or going around or twisting
ilalim	bottom
ilan	related to how many or few or several
ilaw	related to light and illumination
imbak	
imbento	related to invention or inventing
imbestiga	related to investigating, investigation
imbita	related to inviting (someone), invitation
ina	mother
ingat	related to taking care; being careful; being mindful
ingay	related to noise
inggit	related to being envious
inis	related to annoyance, irritation, frustration
init	related to heat, hot
inom	related to drinking
intindi	related to understanding or paying attention to
ipit	related to 1.) squeezing, clasping or clipping (something), 2.) a
ipon	related to saving or gathering up
isa	related to one, single
isda	related to fish or fishing
isip	related to thinking
itim	related to dark, black
ito	
iwan	leaving, abandoning, omitting
iwas	related to avoiding (something), evading (something)
iyak	related to crying
iyon	
kabit	related to attaching, fastening or attaching (something)
kagat	related to a bite or sting
kaibigan	
kaila	
kailan	related to when
kailangan	related to needing, requiring
kain	related to food, eating
kalap	
kalat	related to disorder, disarray, scattered
kaliwa	related to left (opposite of right)
kalma	
kamay	related to hand, shaking hands, by hand
kamít	acquisition; obtaining, getting, achieving
kamot	
kampi	related to bias; ally
kansela	
kanta	related to singing, song
kanya	related to him or her, himself or herself
kapal	related to being thick or dense
kapatid	related to siblings
kape	
kapit	hold, grasp
karga	related to loading (ex: cargo) or carrying
kasa	related to housing; being cocked (as in a gun)
kasal	related to wedding, getting married
katawAn	body
kaya	related to 1.) ability, able (to do something), 2.) thus, that's why,
kayod	related to scraping or working hard
kilala	related to known, acquainted with
kiling	
kiliti	related to tickling
kilo	
kilos	related to movement or behavior
kipot	
kiskis	related to rubbing or friction
kita	related to 1.) seeing (something), 2.) meeting (someone)
klase	case, type, category
kolekta	
kontrol	
kopya	related to copying (something)
kubli	related to being hidden or disguised
kuha	related to getting, having or obtaining
kulang	related to lacking or running short of something
kulay	related to color
kulit	peskiness
kulo	
kulong	related to caged; imprisoned
kumpleto	
kumusta	
kunot	related to scowling, frowning, wrinkling forehead
kuwento	story, tale, narration
laán	destined; intended for; reserved; associated
laba	related to doing laundry, washing clothes
labag	related to violating, going against (something), transgressing
laban	related to fighting
labas	related to being out, outside, outside of something
labis	surplus, excess, too/so much
labo	related to being unclear, hazy or obscured
laga	related to boiling
laganap	
lagay	related to 1.) betting or bribing, 2.) putting in place, 3.) state or
lagi	related to always or habitually (doing something) or having
lago	related to growth or growing
lagot	related to snapping or breaking or being cut off/short
lahad	opening of the hand palm up; unrolling, unfolding
lahat	related to all or all together
lahok	related to entering or adding something
lakad	related to 1.) walking, 2.) errand or mission
lakas	related to strength; loudness
lakbay	voyage, trip, tour, journey
laki	related to bigness or being large or getting bigger
lakip	
lala	
lalaki	related to man, male
lalim	depth
laman	related to meat; contents; substance; flesh
lamig	related to cold or coolness
lampás	overdone, excessive; beyond (syn lagpás, lábis, tagós)
landi	
lang	
langóy	swimming
lantad	
lapad	
lapag	related to the ground or land or landing
lapat	related to applying or fastening
lapit	related to being close or nearby
larawan	related to a picture or portrait or visual
laro	related to playing
lasa	the taste or flavor of something
lasing	drunk, intoxicated, inebriated
lason	related to poison
lata	can
latag	
lathala	related to publishing
lawak	related to width or expanse or vastness
laya	related to freedom, independence
layas	get out!, go away!
layo	related to far away, distant
liban	related to being absent; omitting something
libing	burial
libot	related to wandering around, going around,
ligaw	related to 1.) courting, wooing, dating, 2.) wandering, straying
ligáya	happines, joy
ligid	
ligo	related to bathing or showering
ligpit	related to putting things away or tidying up
ligtas	related to saving, salvation, rescuing, freeing
lihim	related to secret
liit	related to being small
likas	related to environment; naturalness; nature
likha	related to creating or creativity
liko	related to turning or bending
likod	related to back, behind
likom	
likot	related to restlessness
lima	related to five, fifth
limbag	
limit	related to limitations or limits (same as English)
limos	alms; stipend
limot	related to forgetting
linaw	clearness (liquids); clarity (explanation); legibility; legible condition
linggo	
linis	related to cleaning
linlang	related to deceiving, fooling
linya	
lipad	related to flying
lipas	related to passing of time
lipat	related to moving or transferring (something)
lipol	
lista	related to a list
lito	related to being confused, or confusion
liwanag	related to bright, clear, explained
loko	related to 1.) crazy or insane, 2.) cheating, fooling, deceiving
loob	related to inside, interior; inner will, volition
lubog	related to submerging or sinking something
lugod	
luha	related to crying or tears
lumà	old, not new, antiquated (used for objects, not like matanda)
lundag	
lungkot	related to sadness
lunok	related to swallowing
lunsad	
lupa	related to land, soil, earth, ground
lusóg	healthiness
lusot	related to slipping through, penetrating, getting out of a difficult
lutas	related to solving
luto	related to cooking
luwag	related to loose or roomy
mahal	related to 1.) love, 2.) expensive
malas	bad luck; unlucky; intent or searching look
malay	related to awareness, consciousness, understanding
mali	related to wrong; bad; mistaken; incorrect
mana	related to inheriting; inheritance
maneho	management; act of managing; driving (vehicle)
masid	
mata	related to eyes
matay	related to dying
matyag	related to observing, keeping a watch (on something), surveillance
maynila	
minsan	sometimes; once, at one time
motor	
mukha	related to appearance, looking like, seeming; face, facial
mula	related to a source, origin or being from
mulat	related to opening one's eyes or having opened eyes
mura	related to being inexpensive; or cursing
nais	desire, wish
nakaw	related to theft, stealing
ngalan	related to names; naming
nganga	
ngayón	now; today
ngiti	related to smiling
nood	related to watching
okupante	related to occupying
oo	related to yes
oras	related to time or an hour
order	
paa	
paalam	related to goodbye or saying goodbye
pabayâ	without care or attention, careless, negligent (walang-ingat, bulagsak)
pabor	
pagod	fatigue, exhaustion
pahid	
pait	
pako	related to nailing (something to something else), affixing (to
pala	related to 1.) being surprising, or 2.) a blessing or reward
palad	related to chance, fate destiny, luck
palit	related to replace, change, swap
palo	related to hitting something with something
panahon	related to weather; season
panalo	related to winning
panatag	
panátag	calm, tranquil; undisturbed, grounded, sturdy, steady, reliable, secure
pangalan	
panganib	related to danger
pansin	related to noticing; observing
pantay	related to being even, level or equal
papel	related to paper
para	related to 1.) stopping, or 2.) being for something, or 3.) seeming
parada	related to 1.) parades, 2.) parking (a vehicle)
pareho	related to similar; identical; alike; equally
parúsa	punishment
pasa	related to pass (a ball, piece of paper, etc.)
pasan	related to carrying a load, burden
pasiya	related to deciding
pasko	related to Christmas
paso	
pasok	related to 1.) entering, 2.) going to school/work
pasyal	related to strolling around, taking a walk
patak	drop
pataw	related to a punishment or burden imposed
patay	related to killing
patong	related to being on top of something; one thing placed over another
payag	related to agreeing, allowing
payapA	peaceful, tranquil, placid
payat	thin, slender
payo	guidance, advice
pera	
pigil	related to preventing, holding back, stopping
pihit	
pikit	related to closing one's eyes
pili	related to choosing, selecting
pilit	related to forcing; straining
pinta	related to paint or painting
pisil	related to squeezing
pito	related to seven
plano	
post	
pugay	
pula	related to the color red
pulong	meeting
pulot	related to picking up (something)
puna	related to criticizing or remarking
punas	related to wiping (something)
punit	related to tearing (ex: paper)
puno	related to 1.) full/filled, 2.) leading, 3.) trees
punta	related to going (somewhere)
puri	praise
puso	related to the heart
puti	related to whiteness
putok	related to exploding; bursting
putol	related to severing, cutting off
puyát	sleepless, lacking sleep, exhausted from lack of sleep
ramdam	related to feeling something physically, feeling an emotion, a
regalo	
saan	related to where or the whereabouts of something
sabay	related to happening at the same time; simultaneously
sabi	related to saying (something), statement
sabík	eager, keen, yearning
sabit	related to hanging; being suspended on something
sabog	related to exploding or scattering
sabwat	related to conspiracy; conspirators; accomplices (in a crime)
sadya	related to visiting a place or person
sagi	related to touching lightly or brushing against something
sagot	related to answer, reply
sáhod	open hands used to catch a falling object
sahod	salary, wage
saing	related to cooking rice
saka	related to 1.) farming or cultivating, 2.) and / as well
sakal	
sakay	related to riding or getting on board (a vehicle)
sakit	related to pain, hurt, illness, disease
sakop	related to seizing or conquering
saksak	related to stabbing or thrusting or inserting
saksi	related to witnessing or testifying
sala	related to 1.) sin, offense, crime, 2.) living room
salamat	related to thanking, gratitude
salaysay	
sali	related to joining in, participating (in something)
saliksik	
salin	
salita	related to words, speaking, speech
salo	related to catching (something)
salubong	related to meeting a person, greeting a person, welcoming a person
salungat	related to opposing or contradicting
sama	related to 1.) joining, going with; 2.) being bad or evil
samantala	related to 1.) taking advantage of, exploiting, 2.) while, meanwhile
sampa	related to carry over; climb over
sampal	
sampay	
sampu	
sanay	related to being skilled or experienced
sandal	
sangkót	implicated, linked
sanib	related to uniting or coalescing or joining together
santo	
sara	related to closing
saráp	tastiness, deliciousness
sarili	self; private
satsat	
sauli	
sawa	related to being fed up with something; being tired of something
saway	related to rebuking or being the subject of rebuke
saya	related to happiness
sayaw	related to dancing
saysáy	statement; value
selos	jealousy
sibák	chopping wood with an axe. slang for firing someone.
sigaw	related to shouting, yelling
siguro	maybe, perhaps, probably
sikap	diligence, hard work
sikat	related to rising (e.g., rising sun); or being famous
sikip	related to tightness or tightening
siksik	related to being tightly packed or squished or compressed or squeezed
silang	related to being born, giving birth, being brought forth
silangan	
silbi	
silip	related to peeping; peeking
simangot	related to frowning
simba	related to church
simula	
sindi	related to starting a fire, lighting up
singit	
sino	related to who
sipol	
sira	related to broken, damaged, flawed
sisi	related to regret; blame
sisid	
siya	related to 1.) he / she, 2.) satisfied, contented
siyam	related to nine, ninth
subaybay	
subo	related to putting something in one's mouth
subok	related to testing, trying out, experimenting
sugal	related to gambling
súgat	cut, sore, wound
sugod	to dash at, to rush forward
suhol	
suka	related to 1.) throwing up or vomiting, or 2.) vinegar
sukat	related to 1.) measuring something, fitting something 2.) trying on
suko	related to surrendering
sulat	related to writing
sulit	worth it, a good deal; a test
súlong	advance, progress (as military); go ahead!
sumpa	related to swearing or taking an oath
sundô	fetch someone from somewhere
sunod	related to 1.) following, obeying, 2.) next, subsequent
sunog	related to burning, burnt
suntok	related to punching
suot	related to wearing (something)
supil	
suporta	related to support
suri	related to examining or inspecting something carefully
susi	related to a key or lock
suyo	related to affection or romantic interest
taas	related to being high or tall
tabâ	fat
tabi	related to moving to the side of, putting beside
tadtad	related to chopping into smaller pieces
tae	related to feces or poop
taga	related to being from somewhere; or chopping / cutting
tagal	related to long (time), taking a long time
tago	related to hiding, concealing
tagpo	related to location or setting or scene
taguyod	
tahi	related to sewing, binding
tahimik	related to quiet, peaceful
taká	puzzlement, surprise
takas	related to escaping, fleeing
takbo	related to running, operating
takda	related to being set or defined or limited
takip	related to covering, covering up (something), lid
takot	related to fear, frightening, being frightened
tala	related to list, record, table (of information)
talaga	related to surely, certainly, true
tali	
talik	
talíno	smarts, talent
talo	related to losing or being defeated
talsik	
tama	related to correct, right, ideal, exact
tambak	related to dumping out or piling up
tambál	pair
tambay	instantly, immediately; consumed, finished; killed instantaneously
tampók	center of attraction
tanaw	related to seeing from a distance, sight, scene, landscape
tanda	related to 1.) being old, 2.) sign / symbol
tanggal	related to detach; unfasten; disconnect
tanggap	related to receiving, accepting
tanggi	related to refusing or denying
tanggol	
tanghál	to be shown, on display
tangi	related to unique, distinct, particular
tangka	
tangkád	tallness and slenderness
tanim	related to 1.) planting, 2.) grudge
tanong	related to question, questioning
tao	related to people, humans
taon	related to 1.) year, yearly, 2.) happening accidentally or
tapak	related to stepping (on something)
tapat	related to 1.) being direct, honest, straigthforward, 2.) being
tapon	related to throwing away, disposing of something
tapos	related to finishing, concluding, completing (something)
tatag	related to being solid, stable, foundation
tatak	related to seal or imprint or mark
tatlo	related to three
tawa	related to laughter, laughing
tawad	related to 1.) forgiveness, pardon, 2.) discounting something (in
tawag	related to calling or telephoning someone
tawid	related to crossing or going across something
taya	related to estimate or bet
tayo	related to 1.) we / us, 2.) standing up or building up or setting up
tibay	sturdiness
tibok	related to beating or pulsing
tigas	related to hardness; firmness; rigidity
tigil	related to stopping (doing something), stopping by (somewhere)
tiis	related to enduring; withstanding
tikim	related to tasting or sampling
tiklop	
tilî	shriek, screech
timbang	
timpla	
tinda	related to selling, merchandise, merchants
tindi	intensity, severity
tindíg	posture, bearing
tingala	related to looking or tilting upward
tingin	related to noticing, looking
tipid	
tipon	related to gathering, collecting
tira	related to 1.) living or residing somewhere, 2.) left over or
tirik	
titig	related to gazing, staring
tiwala	related to trusting (something/someone), confidence, believing
tiyak	related to deciding or being certain
totoo	related to truth
trabaho	related to work and working
tsismis	
tubig	related to water
tubo	related to profit
tugma	
tugon	related to responding, answering
tugtog	playing of a musical instrument
tuka	related to pecking or a beak (e.g., bird's beak)
tuklas	
tukoy	related to referencing or citing
tukso	related to teasing or joking
tula	related to poems or poetry
tulad	related to similarity or comparison
tulak	related to pushing, shoving, propelling or promoting
tuldok	
tuli	related to circumcision
tulin	
tulog	related to sleeping
tulong	related to helping, assisting
tuloy	related to continuing, proceeding, going forward
tumba	related to falling down; getting knocked down
tunaw	related to melting or dissolving
tunay	related to truth, being true, proving to be true
tungkól	concerning, about
tungo	related to moving toward (something)
tuon	
tuos	
tupad	related to fulfilling something (a duty, a promise)
turo	related to teaching
tusok	piercing, perforation
túto	learning, gaining knowledge or skill (mostly used as root, eg matúto)
tutok	related to being focused on something; or point a weapon
tuwa	related to happiness; joy; happiness; fun
tuwid	related to 1.) being straight or direct; 2.) reasoning or argument
tuyo	related to being dry
ubó	cough
ubos	related to consuming all of something, or using up of something, or
ugali	
ugat	related to roots or veins
ugnay	related to (someone or
uhaw	thirst, thirsty
ukol	related to being set aside or used for something
ulan	related to rain
ulat	related to a report or reporting
ulila	orphan
ulit	related to repeating
ulo	related to the head (figuratively or literally)
una	related to first, being first
unawa	related to understanding or notifying or realizing
unlad	related to development or developing
upa	
upo	related to sitting, being seated
uri	related to type or kind or classification
urong	related to backing up; retreating
usap	related to discussing something (with someone else)
usisa	
usog	related to budging
utang	related to debt, indebtedness, borrowing money
utos	related to order, command, rule
uwi	related to returning home
wagi	
wakas	
wala	related to 1.) none, zero, 2.) absence (of something), to lose
walay	related to separating; separation
walo	related to eight
wasak	ruin, destroy
wika	related to language
yabang	related to being boastful; being arrogant
yakap	related to hug, embrace
yaman	related to wealth, being rich
yari	related to making or manufacturing
yuko	related to bowing one's head, bending forward
