https://anngv.weebly.com/magtagalog-tayo/list-of-tagalog-slang-words-common-phrases-and-profanity

1/13/2017
This article contains Tagalog slang words, common phrases and profanity that are used almost in everyday speech. Tagalog is one of the Filipino languages spoken mostly in the southern parts of Luzon including Metro Manila. There are different varieties of the Tagalog language, mainly: Tagalog Bulaqueño (spoken in Bulacan province), Tagalog Manileño (spoken in Manila and its outskirts), Tagalo Rizaleño (spokern in Rizal province), Tagalog Batanggueño (spoken in Batangas and Laguna provinces, Tagalog Caviteño (spoken in Cavite) and Tagalog of Quezon province. Although there are no big differences, they can be differentiated based on the use of words, spelling and intonation. 

Abnoy	Abnormal person.
Ah, ganon!?	So, that's how it's gonna be!?
Ah, OK!	Ah, ok!
Ah, talaga?	Really? (surprised)
Akala mo lang 'yun!	A common phrase usually told to someone who supposed something the wrong way or on the contrary. Ex. A: Akala ko minahal mo 'ko. B: Akala mo lang 'yun! pero hinde! A:I thought you loved me. B: Well, you supposed it the wrong way!
Akin/Amin na yan!	"Give me that!" or "That's mine so gimmie that!" "That's not yours so give it to me!".
Ako na naman?!	It's me again?!
Alis!	Go out! Get outta here!
Amboy	American boy who lives in the Philippines. 
Anak ng puta naman oh!	Son of a bitch!
Anghit	Body odor.
Ang labo mo!	You say it to a person when he/she is undecided or when he/she can't decide what he/she really likes or could be, having an inconsistency in conversation, can't get what he/she really means.
Ano?!	What?!
Ano ba?!	What do you need?! Don't bother me! What's the matter?!
Ano bang paki mo?	Did it bother you?
Ano daw?	When you failed to hear/understand something
Anong nakain mo?	What happened to you? Literally means What have you eaten? (informal)
Anong say mo?	What do you think?
Apurado	From the Spanish verb "apurar" which means someone in hurry. Ex. "Wag ka ngang apurado!" Don't be in a hurry! or Don't pressure me to do this! 
Aray!	"Ouch!" An interjection of getting in pain. Ex. Aray! Napaso daliri ko! Ouch! My finger got scalded!
Arestado	Arrested.
Asa ka pa!	Usually an interjection which means like "Don't hope too much or you'll get disappointed!". Ex. A: Mahal nya kaya ako? B: Asa ka pa! A: I wonder if he loves me too. B: Hey! Don't hope too much or else you'll end up disappointed!
Asan?	Contraction of Nasaan which refers to the interrogative pronoun Where. Ex: Uy! Asan ka na ba? Hey! Where you at?
Askal	A stray dog.
Astig	Cool. Ex: Pare! astig nung ginawa mo, ah! Dude! What you've done is so cool!
Atat	The same as "apurado".
Ate	Sister (commonly used to call the attention of a female stranger older than you) Ex. Ate, pwede po bang pautang ng bente? Can you lend me 20 pesos? (formal)
Ayoko nga!	When you don't want something somebody is offering, proposing or giving you.
Babaero	A man who's fond of getting himself another woman; a womanizer.
Baboy ka!	Literally means, "you're a pig". It's an expression used to someone filthy.
Badtrip	Disappointment or Upset. Ex. Na-badtrip ako nung nakita kong may kasamang iba 'yung ex ko. I got upset upon seeing my ex with somebody else.
Baduy	Low class or out of fashion. Ex. Ang baduy mo talaga! You're so out of fashion!
Bagets	Youth or sometimes teen-agers.
Bahala ka!	An expression which means you let somebody do something without giving any hand, or sometimes it means you don't care to him/her at all, or you just let him/her do what he or she has to do Ex. A: Tulungan mo naman ako, oh! B: Bahala ka! A: Could you please help me? B: Do it on your own! I don't care at all!
Bahala na ang Dyos	Come what may. Whatever will be, will be. Literally means "Let God do what he has to do".
Bahala na si Batman	Come what may. Whatever will be, will be. Literally means "Let Batman do what he has to do".
Bakla or Bading	Fag (offensive)
Baliw	A mentally-ill person. A crazy person
Banatan	A verb which means to hit someone. Ex. Babanatan talaga kita pag sinabe mo sikreto ko! I'll hit you if you share my secret to others!
Bangag	Stoned
Bansot	One who stunted in growth (quite offensive)
Barkada	Group of friends.
Bat	Contraction of bakit whcih means why. Ex. Bat ka umiiyak? Why are you crying?
Bastardo	Bastard (from Spanish)
Bastos!	Pervert! (you tell it to someone who's becoming pervert or showing you obscene acts)
Batuta	A man's penis (figurative, less offensive)
Bayot	It is actually a cebuano word but nowadays tagalog people use it. It means a fag person.
Bebot	Female.
Beki	Fag (sometimes spelled as Becky or Beckie, less offensive) This picture shows how bekis look like.
Bente	20 pesos (from Spanish) Ex. May bente ka? Do you have twenty pesos?
Berde ang dugo	Gay (figurative, literally means Green blooded)
Bes	Term commonly used to call your best friend especially for girls.
Betlog	Male testicles.
Bi	Bisexual.
Bistado	To be revealed. Ex. Bistado na kayo! Your secret is now revealed or We now know what's your secret!
Bobo	A profanity which came from the Spanish language that means "Dumb". It can be used as an adjective or a noun. 
Bokya	A failure. Ex. Bokya ang show kagabi. Last night's show didn't end up well.
Bold	Semi-porn movies of 80's and 90's.
Bolera/Bolera	One who's fond of flattering others. 
Bongga	Elegant. Ex. Ang bongga ng damit mo, ah! What an elegant dress you have!
Bottom	Passive (sexual behavior)
Boy	Boy.
Boylet	A handsome guy. Usually used by girls and fags upon seeing a handsome guy. Ex. Uy oh! May boylet dun! Tara punta tayo! Hey look! There's a hot guy over there! Come on, let's go!
Brad	Bro, dude, man (from the English word brother)
Brownout	When the electricity is cut off. Ex. Brown-out ng tatlong araw dahil sa bagyo. The electricity has been cut off for three days due to the typhoon.
Bruha	Wicked person (from Spanish)
Brusko	A man with a very big muscular body.
Brutal	Very violent, bad or unpleasant. 
Bulbol	Pubic hair
Burat	Dick head
Burloloy	Body accessories. Ex. Tanggalin mo na 'yang mga burloloy mo sa katawan. Take your body accessories off your body! 
Buwaya	A corrupt person. Literally means alligator. Usually referred by media men to corrupt senators, governors and city mayors. 
Bwelta	Revenge or Response (from the Spanish word vuelta)
Bwisit!	An interjection of disappointment.
Cachupoy/ katsupoy	A two-sided hair like this one.
Casa	Cabaret (from the Spanish, meaning house)
Chaka	Ugly, no-class, hideous, ill-favored, unsightly. Ex. Ang chaka ng syota nya ngayon! His latest girlfriend is so ugly!.
Charot	An interjection of showing someone that you're only telling a joke or kidding. Ex. A: Alam mo mahal kita! B: Talaga? A: Charot! A: You know what, I love you! B: Really? A: Kidding!
Chibog	To eat too much. Ex. Chumibog ako nang husto sa party. I ate a lot at the party.
Chicharon	A Filipino snack prepared by deep-frying the dried pork rind with a little salt.
Chichirya	Junkfood.
Chick	A young attractive woman. (from English)
Chick boy	Same as babaero
Chika	Gossip.
Chimay	Family maid.
Chipipay	Low class. Almost the same as "baduy". (from the English word "Cheap")
Chismis	Gossip (from the Spanish word "Chismes")
Chismoso (males) or Chismosa (females)	The one who is fond of making or sharing gossips to others. (from Spanish)
Chugi	To be bankrupted, to close down or to be evicted. 
Chong	Man friend, dude, guy.
Chupa	Blowjob. Ex. Chupain mo 'ko! Give me a head!
Chupador	Cocksucker
Colboy	Male prostitute in the Philippines. (sometimes spelled as "callboy")
Coño	A wealthy looking person. Ex. Maraming coño ang nakatira sa Ayala-Alabang. There are many wealthy-looking persons living in Ayala-Alabang. (in Spanish, coño means vagina)
Damo	Drugs, Marijuana. Literally means grass.
Datung	Money.
Dedma	To ignore, To brush someone off. Ex. Dinendma ko sa party and ex ko. I brushed my ex off at the party.
Dehins	No, not.
'di nga?	Really?
DOTA	Is a custom scenario for the real-time strategy game Warcraft III: Reign of Chaos and its expansion, Warcraft III: The Frozen Throne, based on the "Aeon of Strife" map for StarCraft.
Dre	Dude (from the Spanish word compadre) 
Droga	Drugs.
Dedo	Dead. (from the English word Dead)
Dun	Contraction of doon which means over there.
Ebak or Echas	Shit (not offensive) Ex. Ayoko dumaan dun kase ang dameng ebak ng aso dun, eh! I don't want to walk over that road since dog-shits are scattered everywhere!
Echapwera	To be neglected or ignored. Ex. Enichapwera nila ako sa pyesta kagabe. They ignored me at the fiesta last night. (from Spanish echa fuera which means throw outside)
Echos!	Almost the same as Charot.
Echosero/Echosera	A kidding/joking person.
Eh ano ngayon?	So what? (literally means so what's today?)
Ek-ek	Unnecessary decorations or things. Ex. Ang dame mong ek-ek! sabihin mo na ang totoo! Get straight forward! Tell me the truth!
Emo	Fashion trend during the 2005-2010 period usually among teens, the term "emo" is stereotyped with wearing slim-fit jeans, sometimes in bright colors, and tight t-shirts (usually short-sleeved) which often bear the names of emo bands.
Engot	Stupid person.
Epal	is a slang which is pertaining to a person who seeks so much attention as if he never got it in his whole lifetime or someone who's get used to breaking in on conversations. Ex. Wag ka ngang epal! Nag-uusap kame! Don't break in! We are talking about something important! 
Ermat	Mother
Erpat	Father
Ewan ko!	I don't know! (in a rude way)
Feeling	To think or to have an opinion about. Ex. Feeling ko uulan. I think it's gonna rain.
Gago/Gaga	Stupid.
Gagong gupit	New haircut.
Gamitin	To take something/somebody for granted. Literally means to use.
Gaya-gaya	One who is fond of copying what others have done. A copycat.
Gelpren	Girlfriend.
Gerlalu	Fag (less offensive)
Gets mo?	Do you understand?
Ginusto mo 'yan eh!	Expression used to someone when he/she finally realizes that it's not worth fighting for or when he/she is suffering the consequences of the decisions he/she has made before. Example, you have a younger sister who got married, got pregnant at a very young age because of this she failed to finish her studies. Then, one day she asks you money for her baby and for other household expenses. Then you tell her, "Bahala ka, ginusto mo 'yan eh!". You tell it to a person to emphasize, show or to prove them that they really made a very bad decision.
Gora	To go. Ex. Gora na tayo sa Manila! Let's go to Manila! (gay lingo)
Gulay	A very weak person (literally means vegetable)
Gurang	Old-aged. (antonym of bagets)
Ha?!	Huh?! or What?!
Haliparot	Somebody as flirt as a prostitute
Hampas lupa	A very poor person.
Hanep!	Cool! 
Hayop ka!	Something like How dare you! An interjection.
Hinayupak	Asshole. Ex. Ano bang problema ng hinayupak na 'yun? What's going on with that asshole?
Hiyas	Pussy (less offensive) Literally means ornament.
Holdap	To be help up by someone. Ex. Na-holdap ako kagabe. I was help up last night. 
Holdaper	Hold upper (from english)
Hudas ka!	You tell it to somebody when he or she is getting bad as Judas.
Ignorante	Ignorant.
Ihi	Urine.
Iligpit	To kill (literally means to put in proper place)
Imbierna	To get annoyed. Ex. Na-imbierna ako sa sinabe nya. I got annoyed of what he has told me.
Inday	A common name for a family maid.
Indian	To fail to show up at an appointment. Ex. Inindian ako ng gelprend ko sa deyt namin. My girl didn't show up on our date.
Inggetero/Inggetera	One who easily gets envious for the things/accomplishments of others.
Inggrata	Ungrateful (from Spanish)
Inutil	Useless or Idiot (from Spanish)
Iskwater	Shanty town (from English)
Itlog	Testicles. Literally means eggs.
Itumba	To kill (literally means to knock down. From Spanish Tumbar)
Jakol	To masturbate (pertaining to male masturbation) (from the English word ejaculate)
Jakolero	Wanker.
Jamming	Usually to sing together. Ex. Nag-jamming kame kagabe sa bar. We sung together last night at the bar.
Jan	There.
Japayuki	A filipina GRO working in Japan.
Jejemon	The one who has managed to subvert the English and Tagalog languages language to the point of incomprehensibility. A new breed of hipster who have developed not only their own language and written text but also their own sub-culture and fashion. A person of hip-hop style.
Jip	A public mode of transportation common in the Philippines.
Joga	A very big boobs.
Jologs	Same as baduy.
Jowa	Lover.
Jus ko!	Oh my God!
Kabit	Mistess. Ex. Wala akong kabit! I don't have another woman!
Kaloka!	You say it when you find out something weird or strange or pathetic. 
Kano	A person from U.S.A.
Kantot	To fuck. Ex. Kantutin mo'ko! Fuck me! (Vulgar)
Kapal mo ah!	You tell it to someone who's being boastful.
Kargada	A man's penis (less offensive) 
Kasado	To be prepared. Ex. Kasado na ang plano namin para bukas. Our plans are all prepared for tomorrow. 
Katas	Sperm (plain rude)
Kayod-kalabaw	To work too hard to accomplish something.
Kelot	Male.
Kalye or Kalsada	Street.
Kepyas	Cunt.
Keri	To be able to do something. Ex. Keri mo bang buhatin ang mga 'to? Can you lift these up?
Kikay	Girly.
Kiki	A woman's pussy.
Kontrabida	Villain, Antagonist.
Kotong	If you are a kotong you ask culprits for money so you won't give them punishments. Usually used to refer to police men who caught law-violators and ask them for money so they won't send them to jail.
Kuha mo?	Do you understand? Literally means Did you get it?
Kuno	Visayan for as if used now by the Tagalog speakers. So if someone is for example an Asian who dyed his hair blonde, and has a penchant to wear blue or green contact lens could be described as: Amerikano-kuno.
Kupal	Idiot or Stupid. 
Kuripot	Miserly, ungenerous.
Kuya	Brother (commonly used to call the attention of a male stranger older than you) Ex. Kuya, pwede po bang pautang ng bente? Dude, Can you lend me 20 pesos? (formal)
Labas!	Get out!
Labasan	To come or to have an orgasm. Literally means to bring out. Ex. Nilabasan ako sa loob lang ng tatlong minuto. I came just within three minutes.
Lamierda	To go shopping. Ex. Tara! mag-lamierda tayo sa Makati! Come on! let's go shopping in Makati!
Lamunin	To eat something up. Ex. Nilamon ng buwaya ang bata. The alligator ate the child up.
Lap-lap	To make out. Ex. Nag-laplapan ang mag-jowa. The lovers made out.
Lasing	Drunk.
Leche ka!	Damn you!
Lintek ka!	Damn you!
Lumayas ka!	Piss off! Go away! (in a rude way)
Ma-angas	Cool or arrogant. Ex. Ang angas nung ginawa mo, ah! What you've done is so cool! 
Ma-antot or Mabantot	of foul smell. Ex. Ma-antot ang mga damit na 'di natuyo sa araw. Clothes that didn't dry up under the sun smell awful.
Ma-buking	To be revealed. Ex. Nabuking na sya ang nag-nakaw sa ginto. They found out that he was the one who had stolen the gold bars.
Macho	Hunk.
Ma-drama	Emotional person.
Mahalay	Lustful.
Mag-bate	To masturbate (males)
Mag-lakwacha	To shop around (almost the same as lamierda)
Mag-pingger	To masturbate (females)
Mag-saing	To cook the rice. ex Ubos na ang kanin kaya mag-sasaing na'ko! We've run out of rice so I have to cook some more.
Mag-sunog ng kilay	To study very hard (literally means to burn one's eyebrow)
Mag-teks	To send a text message. Ex. Oy, nag-teks ako sa'yo, ah! Hey! I texted you, right?
Makikita mo!	Expect something bad. Literally means you will see!. Ex. Pag kinalat mo sikreto ko, makikita mo! If you share my secret to others, you'll see what I'm capable of doing to you!
Malandi	Flirt.
Malas	Bad luck.
Malibog	Horny or lustful.
Mamatay ka na sana!	I hope you die sooner! or Go to hell!
Mani	Pussy (literally means peanut)
Mang-mang	Iliterate.
Mano	To bless to show one's respect (fro Spanish, meaning hand)
Manoy	Boy best friend and sometimes a man's sexual organ.
Matigas ka, ah!	You tell it to someone who's brave enough that he never quits or who doesn't back down.
Merienda	Snack (from Spanish)
Mestiso	Fair-skinned person. 
Misis	Wife (from English)
Mister	Husband (from English)
Molestya	To harrass (from Spanish)
Moreno/Morena	Tanned skin.
Muchacha	Housemaid (from Spanish, meaning Girl)
Muka kang tae!	Stupid jerk
Muna	For the mean time. 
Nanay or Nay	Mother.
Negro/Negra or Negrito/Negrita	A very dark-skinned person (quite offensive)
Nene	Term used to call a little girl.
No?	Isn't? (from Spanish)
Nosebleed	When you're getting a hard time understanding a foreign language especially English. Ex. Na-nonose bleed ako pag kausap ko ang kanong 'yun. I'm getting a hard time understanding what that American is saying. 
Ok ka lang?	Are you ok?
Ok lang	I'm ok or I'm fine.
Okray	To be kidding, to praise somebody kiddingly or to make false stories about something or someone. Ex. A: Uy ang ang ganda mo! B: Wag ka ngang mang-okray! A: You look gorgeous today! B: Please stop joking around! 
Okrayera	The one who praises somebody kiddingly.
Olats	Loser. Ex. Olats ka pala eh! You have no guts!
Ows?	Really?
Pahiya ka no?	Wasn't that embarassing? 
Pakshet!	Fuck shit! (from English)
Pakyu ka!	Fuck you! (from English)
Palpak	A thing that doesn't function correctly. Ex. Pare, palpak naman ung binigay mong gadget sa'kin! Hey dude! The gadget you'd given me doesn't function well!
Panggulo	Hindrance.
Pare/Pre	The most common way of saying dude to a male friend. Ex. Pare! inuman tayo mamayang gabe, ah!? Hey dude! Let's have a drink tonight, OK?
Patok	Something that is well patronized by many. Ex. Pare! Patok na patok yang pancit mo, ah! Hey dude! It seems they all like your pancit. Isn't? 
Payatot	A very thin person.
Pekpek	The most common way to refer to a woman's vagina.
Pera	Money (probably from Spanish)
Plastik	Two-faced personality.
Platito	Small plate.
Pok-pok	Prostitute.
Porma	The way you dress up. Ex. Gusto ko yang porma mo ngayon, pare! I like your outfit today!
Pramis?	You promise me? (from English)
Praning	Paranoid.
Promdi	A term used to describe someone from the province who has just come to Manila (can be offensive at times)
Pucha!	Fuck! (Euphemism of Puta)
Puerta	Vagina (from Spanish which means door)
Puke	Cunt.
Puke ng ina mo!	Fuck you! Literally means Your mom's cunt!
Pumalya	To fail, to stop working, to go wrong. Ex. Pumalya ang plano namin. Our plan didn't turn out well. (from the Spanish verb Fallar)
Puñeta!	Fuck!
Puñeta ka!	Fuck you!
Puta ka!	You're a bitch! (vulgar)
Putang ina mo!	Fuck you! Literally means Your mother is a bitch! (Very vulgar)
Putukan	To come on someone (Literally means to burst out offensive when used in an obscene manner) Ex. Pinutukan nya ako sa mukha. He came on my face.
Pwet	Buttocks.
Querida	Mistress. Ex. "Puñeta ka! Mag-sama kayo ng puta mong querida! Fuck you! Piss off with your fucking mistress! (from Spanish)
Quieme	Et cetera, nonsense. (sometimes spelled as kyeme)
Regla	Menstruation. 
Repa	Buddy.
Resbak	Revenge.
Retokado/a	Someone undergone a plastic surgery.
Salbahe	Naughty (from Spanish)
Sapak	To hit, to punch or to spank someone. Ex. Sasapakin kita pag nilandi mo gelprend ko! I'm gonna spank you if you chat up with my girl!
Segunda Mano	Second-hand. Ex. Mahilig ako bumili ng mga segunda manong gamit I get used to buying second-hand things. (from Spanish)
Seksi	Sexy.
Siempre!	Of course!
Siesta	Afternoon. The time of the day in which Filipinos usually sleep.
Sira ulo	Mentally-ill person.
Shit!	Shit!
Sikyo	Security guard. (from English)
Silahis	Bisexual.
Sis	The same as teh.
Skul	School. (from English)
Sosyal	Class
Suplado/Suplada	Snobbish (probably from Spanish)
Supot	Uncircumcised man (offensive)
Suso	Tits.
Susuhin	To give someone a head (literally means to breast feed a baby)
Syota	Lover.
Tae	Shit
Tagay!	Let's have a shot! or cheers! (said when having a drinking session)
Tambay	To hang-out. Ex. Tambay naman tayo sa bahay namin! Let's stay over my our house for the mean time!
Tamod	Sperm or a man's cum.
Tanga	Idiot.
Tanggero	The one who serves the drinks.
Tang ina mo!	Fuck you! (contraction of Putang ina mo!, offensive vulgar)
Tang ina naman oh!	You say it when you are pissed off.
Tara!	Let's go!
Tarantado	Foolish (rude) Ex. Tarantado ka! Bakit mo'ko niloko? You fool! What did you take me in for?
Tarugo	Man's penis. (probably from Spanish)
Tatay or Tay	Father
Tate	United States of America.
Tayp/type	To like someone. Ex. Tayp kita! I like you! 
Teh	Used among girl/gay friends. Ex. Uy teh! kamusta ka na? Hey girl! How's it going?
Telenovela	Soap operas in Latin America.
Tiklo	The same as bistado.
Timang	Crazy or out of one's mind.
Tinggil	Clitoris.
Tira	A common way of saying to fuck. Ex. Ano pare?! tinira mo na naman ang misis mo kagabe? Dude, what? You screwed your wife again last night?
Titi	The most common way to refer to a man's penis.
Todas	To kill or to die Ex. Tinodas ng mga pulis ang mga holdaper. The policemen shot the holduppers.
Tomador	Heavy drinker (from Spanish)
Tomboy, Tibo, or T-bird	Lesbian (slang)
Top	Active (sexual behavior)
Topak	When someone has topak he/she is acting up.
Toro	To fuck. Ex. Tinoro ko sya. I fucked her. (less offensive)
Totoy	Little boy.
Toxic	Very difficult Ex. Pare, toxic 'yung exam kanina! Dude! the exam was so difficult for me!
Trip	Like Ex. Trip mo bang sumama sa'kin? Do you want to come with me?
Tropa	Group of friends (from Spanish)
Tuli	Circumsized.
Tumae	To shit.
Tumahimik ka!	Shut up!
Ulol	Jerk. Ex. Tumahimik ka! ulol! Shut up! Jerk!
Umihi	To pee.
Upak	To punch (almost the same as sapak)
Viva!	Long live! (from Spanish)
Wag ka mang-gulo!	Don't bother me!
Wag ka na ngang bumoses jan!	Stop breaking in on the conversation!
Wala akong paki!	I don't care!
Wala kang kwenta!	You're good for nothing! (offensive)
Wala kang utang na loob!	You're ungrateful! (offensive)
Walang hiya ka!	You're shameless! (offensive but at times used as an moderate interjection)
Weh?	Really?
Yosi	Cigarette.
