§5.14. Social verbs. 

> This is a very good section, covering all maki*- verbs.
> All are ang -> sa (doer -> other person(s))
> There are two types: simple and reciprocal
> simple social verbs are formed from ma-, -um-, mag-, magpa- (non-reciprocal mag verbs only)
>  - those derived from mag- verbs may be formed with either maki- or makipag-, usually maki- is preferred.
> reciprocal social verbs are formed from reciprocal mag- and mag-an verbs
>  - these are formed by replacing the mag- of the underlying reciprocal verb with makipag- 

Derived verbs formed with the prefix maki- (plus; in some cases, other affixes — see below) express 
actions that are performed together with another person or other people; these verbs may be called 
SOCIAL VERBS. 

All social verbs are actor—focus, selecting as topic the performer(s) of the action denoted 
by the verb; a sa phrase is used to express the one(s) together with whom the action is performed. For 
example, in the sentence: 

Nakikikain ng hapunan si Ben sa Nanay.	'Ben is eating supper with Mother.' 

the performer of the action is expressed by si Ben, the person together with whom the action is performed, 
by sa Nanay. 

Social verbs are derived from other AF verbs, major and derived. A sentence with a social verb in the 
predicate may be said to be derived from a sentence with the underlying non-social verb in the predicate, 
and with a coordinate nominal topic (cf. §3.10). The derivation involves the replacement of one of the 
coordinate nominals with a sa phrase. Thus the sentence Nakikikain ng hapunan si Ben sa Nanay may be 
said to be derived from: 

Kumakain ng hapunan si Ben at ang Nanay.	'Ben and Mother are eating supper.' 

Note that any complement(s) accepted by the underlying verb (such as ng hapunan in the example) are also 
accepted by the social verb. 

On the basis of both meaning and rules of formation, social verbs may be divided into two subclasses:
 SIMPLE SOCIAL VERBS AND RECIPROCAL SOCIAL VERBS. 

Simple social verbs may be derived from ma-, -um, mag-, magpa- (indirect action — cf. §5.12, subsection (1))
or mang- verbs. 

(The mag verbs from which simple social verbs are derived are those that do not express reciprocal action. 
Of the -um and ma- verbs, only those expressing voluntary actions have social verb counterparts.) 

The affix correspondences between the underlying and derived verbs are:

Underlying Affix     Simple Social Affix
    ma-                 maki-
    -um-                maki-
    mag-                maki(pag)-
    magpa-              makipagpa-
    mang-               makipang-

Note that simple social verbs derived from mag- verbs may be formed with either maki- or makipag. The 
maki- formation is preferred in most cases. 

As the English translations with 'share (in)' indicate, simple social verbs often carry the implication 
that the performer (expressed by the sentence topic is taking part in an activity in which another person 
(expressed by the sa phrase) has, in some sense, a prior or more direct involvement. Some pertinent 
illustrations are: 

Uminom sila ng alak; nakiinom ako sa kanila.	'They drank wine; I drank along with them.' 

Napag-alaman ko ang pagkamatay ng inyong ama; nakikidalamhati ako sa inyo.	'I heard about your father's death; I share in your grief.' 

RECIPROCAL SOCIAL VERBS are derived from intransitive mag- verbs that express reciprocal actions (cf. 
§5.6, class G). The reciprocal social verbs are formed by replacing the mag- of the underlying verb with 
makipag-. 

Underlying Reciprocal Verb       Reciprocal Social Verb 
magbigayan 'exchange gifts'      makipagbigayan 'exchange gifts with' 
magbuntalan 'exchange blows'     makipagbuntalan 'exchange blows with' 
magkamay 'exchange handshakes'   makipagkamay 'shake hands with' 
maghiwalay 'separate'            makipaghiwalay 'separate from' 
magsagutan 'quarrel'             makipagsagutan 'quarrel with' 
mag-usap 'converse'              makipag-usap 'converse with' 

Note that, while simple social verbs derived from mag- verbs are formed with either maki- or makipag-
reciprocal social verbs derived from mag- verbs are always formed with makipag-. 
