A duplicated moderative formation may occur together with medyo or ng kaunti without any change 
of meaning: e.g., 
Maganda-ganda si Maria.	'Maria is rather pretty.'
Medyo maganda-ganda si Maria.	'Maria is rather pretty.'
Maganda-ganda nang kaunti si Maria.	'Maria is rather pretty.'

In the case of duplicated moderative formations involving unaffixed adjectives, the use of medyo or nang 
kaunti together with the duplicated formation is always preferred, and in some cases may be considered 
obligatory. Thus: 
Medyo pagud-pagod ang nanay.	'Mother is a little tired.' 
Pagud-pagod nang kaunti ang nanay.	'Mother is a little tired.' 
but not normally: *Pagud-pagod ang nanay. 

Also (p243):
Maganda-ganda si Rosa kaysa sa kay Maria.	'Rosa is a little prettier than Maria.
Note: "kaysa sa kay" can also be "kaysa kay" or just "kay".

Tumakbo si Ed nang mabilis-bilis kaysa kay Bob.  'Ed ran a little faster than Bob.' 
Mabigat-bigat ang maleta mo kaysa sa akin.  'Your suitcase is a little heavier than mine.' 
Marami-raming tao doon kaysa dito.  'There are a few more people there than here.' 
Mahusay-husay siyang kumanta kaysa sumayaw.  'She sings somewhat better than she dances.' 
Malamig-lamig kahapon kaysa sa ngayon.  'It was a little cooler yesterday than it is today.'

p216: pa- adjectives
There are adjectives of three types formed with the prefix pa-: INTERMITTENT-ACTIVITY ADJECTIVES,
INCIPIENT-ACTIVITY ADJECTIVES , and pa- MANNER ADJECTIVES. 

Intermittent-activity adjectives consist of pa- plus two duplicating syllables (dup2), and a base.
The duplicating syllables and the base in most cases also occur in a moderative directional -um- verb
 (cf. §5.16, subsection (2.b)) that expresses the occasional or diffuse performance of an activity.
The adjective has essentially the same meaning as the related verb, except that it expresses the
performance of the activity as a characteristic, rather than as an occurrence.
"now and then", "here and there" (as in 'pagala-gala')

ex:
padalu-dalo	'attend now and then' (dumalu-dalo)
pasama-sama	'accompany occasionally' (sumama-sama)
pagala-gala	'wander here and there (in)' (gumala-gala)

The same directional complements (sa phrases) that follow the moderative verbs follow the 
intermittent-activity adjectives: e.g., 
Padalu-dalo sa sayawan sina Maria.	'Maria and her friends attend dances now and then.' 
(Dumalu-dalo sa sayawan sina Maria.	'Maria and her friends attended dances now and then.') 
Pagala-gala sila sa palengke araw-araw.	'They wander here and there in the market every day.' 
(Gumala-gala sila sa palengke araw-araw.	'They wandered here and there in the market every day.') 

There is at least one intermittent-activity adjective, paminsan-minsan 'occasional(ly),' that is not 
related to an -um- verb. An example of its use is: 
Paminsan-minsan ang baha dito.	'There are floods here occasionally.' (Literally: 'The floods here are occasional.') 

Incipient-activity adjectives, like most intermittent-activity adjectives, include pa- and a base that also 
occurs as the base of a directional -um- verb. The base is, however, not preceded by duplicating syllables. 
Incipient-activity adjectives are often equivalent to English 'starting to' plus a verb. Some examples are: 
paakyat 'starting to climb' (cf. umakyat 'climb') 
paalis 'starting to leave' (cf. umalis 'leave') 
palubog 'starting to set/sink' (cf. lumubog 'set/sink') 
papunta 'starting to go' (cf. pumunta 'go') 
pauwi 'starting to go home' (cf. umuwi 'go home')

Paakyat na siya (sa bundok.)	'He is starting to climb (the mountain) now.' 
Palubog na ang araw.	'The sun is starting to set now.' 

Pa- manner adjectives consist of pa- plus a base that also occurs as the base of one of the following: a 
directional -um- verb, an intransitive -um- verb (cf. §5.6, class E), or an intransitive mag- .verb (cf. §5.6, 
class G). The adjective is often equivalent to an adverbial expression of manner in English: e.g., 
pabulong 'in a whisper' (cf. bumulong 'whisper') 
padabog 'with motions of anger' (cf. dumabog 'move angrily') 
pahinanakit 'in an injured manner' (cf. maghinanakit 'have injured feelings') 
paismid 'with a grimace' (cf. umismid 'grimace') 
pangiti 'smilingly' (cf. ngumiti 'smile') 
pasayaw 'as if dancing' (cf. sumayaw 'dance') 
patagilid 'sideways' (cf. tumagilid 'move sideways') 

Except when they initiate certain adjective-plus-complement constructions (cf. §4.17), manner 
adjecties occur as predicates only with topics of the following types: gerunds (cf. §3.26) and nominalized 
verb bases (cf. §3.27).

Pabulong ang salita/pagsasalita ni Pedro.	Pedro speaks/spoke in a whisper.
Padabog ang kilos/pagkilos nila.	They are/were moving angrily.

p147,8:
lahat + ng phrase construction serving as topic:
"ang lahat ng" or "na lahat ang"
In free alternation with a lahat-plus-ng- phrase construction serving as the topic of a sentence (after
ang) there occurs a construction in which the linker -ng or the linker na/-ng plus lahat occurs after the
first word of the sentence + any enclytics:

Natutulog ba ang lahat ng mga bata?	Are all of the children sleeping.
Natutulog bang lahat ang mga bata?	Are all of the children sleeping.

p148: "lahat ang" The linker-plus-lahat construction always refers to the topic of the sentence: 
Bumasang lahat ng mga libro ang mga bata.	'All of the children read books.' 
Binasang lahat ng mga bata ang mga libro.	'The children read all of the books.' 

Note: 'may' does not occur before a deictic pronoun.  Use mayroon.
p134
possessive sa phrases:
sa phrase meaning "belongs" ("possessive sa phrase"):
Sa bata ang lapis.	'The pencil belongs to the child.'
p135
Nasaan ang lapis na sa akin?, Nasaan ang aking lapis?	Where is my pencil?
p274
Sa mesa ang relos.	'The watch goes/belongs on the table.'
Sa kahon ang relos.	'The watch goes/belongs in the box.'

("person with <adj> <noun>": <noun/head> na <adj> ang <noun>):
babaeng berde ang baro	'woman with the green dress' 
batang bago ang lapis	'child with the new pencil'  (noun/head	na adj ang noun)
cmp to (indefinite):
batang may bagong lapis	'child with a new pencil'

p274
possessive may phrases: possession of specific but not yet identified object(s)
May relos ang Nanay.	'Mother has a watch.'
Mayroon niyan/niyon/noon si Juan.	Juan has some of that/those.

With phrases introduced by mayroon or marami the object(s) possessed may be expressed either 
by the ng form of a deictic pronoun or by an unmarked noun preceded by the linker -ng.
Marami noon si Juan.	'Juan has a lot of that/those.' 
Maraming pera si Juan.	'Juan has a lot of money.'

p276
indefinite may phrases:
In indefinite phrases, may/mayroong/maraming is followed by an inflected form of a verb.

If the verb in an indefinite may phrase predicate is an actor-focus verb, the sentence has no topic.

Sentences in which may or mayroon is followed by an actor-focus verb are often equivalent to English sentences with an indefinite
pronoun ('someone', 'something') as subject

May darating bukas.	Someone is coming/arriving tomorrow.

Sentences in which marami is followed by an actor-focus verb are often equivalent to English sentences with 'a lot (of people/things)'
 (or 'lots (of people/things)') as subject

Maraming darating bukas.	A lot (of people) are coming/arriving tomorrow.

Mayroon bang nangyari?	Did something happen?

If the verb in an indefinite may phrase predicate is a goal-focus verb, the sentence has a topic, which represents the performer of the
 action of the verb.  (and, as topic, is an ang phrase..)

May ginawa ang Amerikano.	The American did something. (existential)

(May pera ang Amerikano.	The American has money. (possessive))

(Ginawa ng Americano iyon.	The American did that.)

May gagawin si Juan kahapon (pero hindi niya nagawa.)
Juan had something to do yesterday. / Juan was going to do something yesterday.

May ginagawa/ginawa si Juan doon.	Juan does/did something there.

Mayroon siyang pinuntahan/pinupuntahan araw-araw.	'He went/goes somewhere every day.'
Marami akong sinusulatan araw-araw.	I (have to) write to a lot of people every day.

May ayaw/kailangang/dapat/gustong/ibig gawin si Juan.	Juan doesn't want/needs/ought/wants/wants to do something.

Mayroon siyang (mga) tindahang pinupuntahan araw-araw.	'He goes to some stores every day.'
Mayroon siyang pinupuntahang (mga) tindahan araw-araw.	'He goes to some stores every day.'

May sinulat ako. (cf. Sinulat ko ang liham. 
'I wrote something.' 'I wrote the letter.') 
May sinulatan ako. (cf. Sinulatan ko si Pedro. 
'I wrote to someone.' 'I wrote to Pedro.') 
May isinulat ako (ng liham). (cf. Isinulat ko (ng liham) ang Nanay. 
'I wrote (a letter) for someone.' 'I wrote (a letter) for Mother.') 
May pinagsulatan ako. (cf. Pinagsulatan ko ang desk. 
'I wrote (it) somewhere.' 'I wrote (it) on the desk.') 
May ipinangsulat ako. (cf. Ipinangsulat ko ang lapis. 
'I wrote with something.' 'I wrote with the pencil.') 

p279
existential may phrases:
may/mayroong/maraming + noun

may/mayroong -> 'there is/was..'
May libro sa mesa.	'There's a book on the table.' 
May parti kahapon.	'There was a party yesterday.' 
Mayroon ding gatas.	'There's some milk too.

maraming -> 'there's a lot of..'
Maraming pagkain.	'There's a lot of food.' 
Maraming trak sa daan.	'There are a lot of trucks on the street.

As in the case of possessive phrases, mayroon or marami in existential phrases may be followed by the ng 
form of a deictic pronoun, instead of by a linker plus a noun. (Once more, may does not occur before a 
deictic.)

Mayroon nito roon.	'There's some of this there.'
Marami nito roon.	'There's a lot of this there.'

FIN
